docs: ui as a tree (#1067)
deephaven/deephaven-plugins: plugins/ui/docs/describing/your-ui-as-a-tree.md

# Your UI as a Tree

Your `deephaven.ui` query is taking shape with many components being nested within each other. How does `deephaven.ui` keep track of your query's component structure?

> `deephaven.ui`, and many other UI libraries, model UI as a tree. Thinking of your app as a tree is useful for understanding the relationship between components. This understanding will help you debug future concepts like performance and state management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`deephaven.ui`, and many other UI libraries, model UI as a tree. This approach helps clarify the relationships between components and aids in debugging issues related to performance and state management.
```

> `deephaven.ui`, and many other UI libraries, model UI as a tree. Thinking of your app as a tree is useful for understanding the relationship between components. This understanding will help you debug future concepts like performance and state management.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`deephaven.ui`, and many other UI libraries, model a UI as a tree. Thinking of your app as a tree is useful for understanding the relationship between components. This understanding will help you debug future concepts like performance and state management.
```

Reviewer 2: I actually see that you refer to UI in the same way `and UI is often...`, so maybe this is correct. If it's not, it should be changed throughout.

Author: I think it is correct.

```python
from deephaven import ui
import random

@ui.component
def random_generator():
    num, set_num = ui.use_state()

    def generate():
        set_num(random.random())

    return ui.flex(
        ui.text(f"Random Number: {num}"),
        ui.button("Generate random number", on_press=generate),
        direction="column",
    )

@ui.component
def app():
    return ui.flex(
        ui.heading("Random Number Generator"),
        random_generator(),
        direction="column",
    )

my_app = app()
```

![my_app](../_assets/your-ui-as-a-tree1.png)

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[app] -->|renders| B[ui.flex]
    B -->|renders| C[ui.heading]
    B -->|renders| D[random_generator]
    D -->|renders| E[ui.flex]
    E -->|renders| F[ui.text]
    E -->|renders| G[ui.button]
```

From the example app, we can construct the above render tree. Each arrow in the tree points from a parent component to a child component.

A render tree represents a single render pass of a `deephaven.ui` component. With conditional rendering, a parent component may render different children depending on the data passed.

We can update the app to conditionally render either a `ui.text` or a `ui.heading`.

> ```python

Reviewer 2: Grab a screenshot or GIF of the UI with this code like with the previous one.

Author: Added

from deephaven import ui
import random

@ui.component
def random_generator():
    num, set_num = ui.use_state()
    flag, set_flag = ui.use_boolean()

    def generate():
        set_flag.toggle()
        set_num(random.random())

    return ui.flex(
        ui.text(f"Random text: {num}")
        if flag
        else ui.heading(f"Random heading: {num}"),
        ui.button("Generate random number", on_press=generate),
        direction="column",
    )

@ui.component
def app():
    return ui.flex(
        ui.heading("Random Number Generator"),
        random_generator(),
        direction="column",
    )

my_app = app()
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[app] -->|renders| B[ui.flex]
    B -->|renders| C[ui.heading]
    B -->|renders| D[random_generator]
    D -->|renders| E[ui.flex]
    E -->|renders?| F[ui.text]
    E -->|renders?| G[ui.heading]
    E -->|renders| H[ui.button]
```

In this example, depending on the `flag` , we may render `ui.text` or `ui.heading`. The render tree may be different for each render pass.

> Although render trees may differ across render passes, these trees are generally helpful for identifying what the top-level and leaf components are in a `deephaven.ui` component. Top-level components are the components nearest to the root component and affect the rendering performance of all the components beneath them and often contain the most complexity. Leaf components are near the bottom of the tree and have no child components and are often frequently re-rendered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although render trees may differ across render passes, these trees are generally helpful for identifying what the top-level and leaf components are in a `deephaven.ui` component. Top-level components are those nearest to the root component and affect the rendering performance of all the components beneath them and often contain the most complexity. Leaf components are near the bottom of the tree and have no child components. They are often frequently re-rendered.
```

> Identifying these categories of components are useful for understanding data flow and performance of your component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Identifying these categories of components is useful for understanding the data flow and performance of your component.
```
